demoSite/ai-assistant-spec.md, before:

# AI Assistant Feature Specification for Kroki Diagram Editor

## Overview

The AI Assistant provides intelligent diagram generation and editing capabilities integrated directly into the Kroki diagram editor web application. It allows users to create, modify, and troubleshoot diagrams using natural language prompts.

## Core Requirements

### Prompt Processing

Send composed prompts to the configured AI backend API with appropriate context:

1. **Prompt Template**
   - Use a template string (called `promptTemplate`) that includes placeholders for `diagramType`, `currentCode`, and `userPrompt`.
   - The user prompt must be modifiable by the user in the settings if they are using a custom API. othersise, the prompt theme is fixed in the backend. The backend proxy prompt must be configurable in the .env file so that it can be updated without modifyuing code in teh docker based build system.
   - The system prompt must ensure that the AI response is always in the form of a valid JSON object: `{"diagramCode": "...", "explanation": "..."}`. The `diagramCode` field must contain only the raw diagram code. The `explanation` field should contain a brief, user-friendly summary of the changes made by the AI.

2. **Context Inclusion**
   - Include the current diagram type (e.g., PlantUML, Mermaid, Graphviz)
   - Include the current diagram code if it exists
   - Support diagram validation and error correction

### User Interface

1. **Chat Interface**
   - Floating, draggable chat window
   - Resizable input area with drag handle (60px-300px height range)
   - Sticky input positioning at bottom of chat window
   - Proper scrolling for message history
   - Clear visual distinction between user and AI messages

2. **Input Handling**
   - Enter key sends messages
   - Shift+Enter creates new lines
   - Auto-resize input area based on content
   - Send button for mouse/touch users
   - Escape key minimizes chat when focused

3. **Visual Integration**
   - Match application theme (light/dark mode)
   - Consistent styling with main application
   - Professional animations and transitions
   - Mobile-friendly responsive design
4. chat history must be cleared when the user closes the chat window. The chat history must not be persisted across sessions.
5. chat history must be limited to 100 messages, with the oldest messages being removed when the limit is reached.
6. chat history must be displayed in a scrollable area, with the most recent messages at the bottom.
7. chat messages must be displayed in a chat bubble format, with user messages on the right and AI messages on the left.
8. the chat window must show an indicator for the AI response when it is being generated, or error retrys are in progress and the indicator must be removed when the response is received.
9. An indication of whether the system default AI backendo is being used or a user provided API endpoint is being used must be shown in the chat window. This should be a small label at the top of the chat window that indicates "Using Default AI Backend" or "Using User Provided API Endpoint" based on the user's configuration.
10. If the user is using a custom API endpoint, and there are communication errors or unfixable errors with the backend, the chat window must display a clear error message indicating that the AI Assistant is unable to communicate with the backend and include a suggestion to check the API endpoint and key configuration in the settings. The error message must also show a link to the settings modal where the user can update their API endpoint and key configuration. This is not an additional settings requirement, but rather an error handling requirement for the chat window. So just show the same global settings modal that is already implemented in the application.


### additional Ai assistant Settings Panel Requirements

Add a new "AI Assistant" tab in the settings UI with the following configurable options:

1. **API Configuration**
   - checkbox to enable/disable custom API key and endpoint configuration by the user. IF a user does not enable this, the app will use the default backend proxy API. using the backend proxy API is the default behavior.
   - AI Enabled Toggle (default: true)
   - AI Endpoint URL Input (default: https://api.openai.com/v1/chat/completions). enabled only if the user has enabled custom API configuration.
   - API Key Input (default: empty, enabled only if the user has enabled custom API configuration)
   - Model Selector (Default: gpt-4o). enabled only if the user has enabled custom API configuration.
     - Dropdown for selecting AI model
     - Default to "gpt-4o" if available, otherwise fallback to "gpt-4" or "gpt-3.5 Turbo"
     - Allow custom text input for unsupported models
    - Options should include:
        - GPT-4o
        - GPT-4
        - GPT-3.5 Turbo
        - Claude 3
        - Custom (text input)

2. **Behavior Settings**
   - Maximum Retry Attempts (default: 3, applies to all users)
   - Custom user Prompt Template Editor (appears when "Custom" is selected)
   - Auto-validate Generated Code (toggle)

3. **Privacy Options**
   
   - Timeout Setting (seconds, default: 30)

These settings apply to both direct and proxied (backend) API usage.

## Backend Support

### Default API Usage (No User Configuration)

If the user does not configure their own endpoint or API key, the app must send requests to a proxy backend API.

This proxy will:

- Use its own API keys (not exposed to the frontend)
- Handle rate limiting and error management
- Provide enhanced security and logging
- sends responses back to the frontend 
- uses system and user prompt templates from the .env file, which can be updated without modifying the code in the docker-based build system.
- uses API endpoint, model and key from the .env file, which can be updated without modifying the code in the docker-based build system.
- Validate diagram code using Kroki before sending to AI
- Recieves the current diagram type, code and user request as input, and returns a response with the generated code and any error messages.
- provide appropriate error messages for API failures, authentication errors, and other issues.
- support fetching the system prompt and user prompt templates so that it can be used in the frontend when the user is configuring their own API endpoint and key.
    - In this case, the frontend must not allow the user to modify the system prompt template, but it must allow the user to modify the user prompt template.

### Proxy Server Requirements
- Implemented in Python using Flask
- Handle CORS for frontend requests
- allowed domains are configured in the .env file
- Validate request origins to prevent unauthorized access


### Custom API Support

When users configure their own API endpoint and key:
- Send requests directly to the specified endpoint 
    - Fetch the system and user prompt templates from teh proxy server but do not use the proxy server to send requests to the AI provider.
    - In this case, the frontend must not allow the user to modify the system prompt template, but it must allow the user to modify the user prompt template.
- Store credentials securely (not in plain localStorage)
- do not show the API key in plain text unless the user explicitly requests it.
- Handle API responses and errors gracefully
- Validate inputs before sending requests
- Provide appropriate error messages for API failures

## Handling AI responses
- The system and user prompts must be setup in such a way that the AI response is always in the form of a valid JSON object: `{"diagramCode": "...", "explanation": "..."}`.
  - The `diagramCode` field must contain only the raw diagram code, without any additional text or markdown code fences.
  - The `explanation` field should contain a brief, user-friendly summary of the changes made by the AI. This explanation will be displayed in the chat window.
  - The current diagram type and code must be included in the prompt to ensure the AI understands the context. Use prompt templates to ensure the AI requests are formatted correctly and the context is included.
  - If the user asks for something that the AI cannot do, the AI must respond with an appropriate error message in the `explanation` field, and the `diagramCode` field should be empty or contain a message indicating that no code was generated.
- When the AI response (expected as a JSON object) is received, either from the proxy server or directly from the AI provider, the response must first be checked for errors and valid JSON structure.
- The `diagramCode` from the JSON response must be validated to ensure it is valid diagram code. Do this by sending the `diagramCode` to the Kroki API for validation. if a non-200 response is received, the `diagramCode` must be considered invalid.
- The `explanation` from the JSON response should be displayed as an AI message in the chat window.
- in case of an invalid `diagramCode`, the AI Assistant must retry the request by including the original code, the invalid `diagramCode` provided by the AI, the user prompt, and the Kroki validation error message in the prompt. This will help the AI understand what went wrong and how to fix it. The retry request must also ask for the same JSON structured response.
    - this means there must be an additional prompt template for retrying the request, which includes the original code, new code provided by the AI, and the user prompt and kroki validation error message.
- Use the retry count to limit the number of retries for invalid responses.
- The retry indication must be shown in the chat window, so that the user can see how many times the AI has tried to generate a valid response.


## Technical Implementation

### Frontend Components

1. **AI Assistant Class**
   - Implement as a self-contained ES6 class
   - Support configuration via config manager or fallback
   - Handle element selection using proper context
   - Provide comprehensive error handling

2. **Chat Window Layout**
   - Use flexbox with proper constraints
   - Implement sticky positioning for input container
   - Ensure scrollable message area with fixed input
   - Support resizable input area via drag handle

3. **Keyboard Navigation**
   - Enter key sends messages (no shift key)
   - Shift+Enter creates new lines
   - Escape key minimizes chat when focused
   - Tab navigation for accessibility

### Backend Components

1. **Proxy Server**
   - Implement in Python using Flask
   - Provide proper CORS handling
   - Validate request origins for security
   - Implement rate limiting and error handling
   - Support environment variable configuration

2. **API Integration**
   - Multiple AI providedr support will be facilitatted with litelllm proxy . 
   - Properly format prompts with context
   - Validate diagram code with Kroki

## Configuration & Environment

### Environment Variables

The backend should support configuration via environment variables:

```
AI_ENABLED=true
AI_ENDPOINT=https://api.openai.com/v1/chat/completions
AI_API_KEY=your_api_key_here
AI_MODEL=gpt-4o
AI_TIMEOUT=30
```

### Frontend Configuration

The frontend should store user preferences in the application's configuration system:

```javascript
{
  ai: {
    enabled: true,
    endpoint: "API_ENDPOINT_URL",
    apiKey: "USER_API_KEY", 
    model: "gpt-4o",
    maxRetryAttempts: 3,
    promptTheme: "default",
    autoValidate: true,
    useProxy: true,
    persistHistory: false,
    timeout: 30
  }
}
```

## User Experience Guidelines

1. **First-time Experience**
   - Provide a clear welcome message
   - Explain chat history limitations
   - Suggest example prompts for getting started

2. **Error Handling**
   - Show clear error messages for API failures
   - Provide suggestions for fixing configuration issues
   - Degrade gracefully when backend is unavailable

3. **Performance**
   - Show loading indicators during API requests
   - Maintain responsive UI during heavy operations
   - Implement request timeouts and cancellation

## Security Considerations

1. **API Key Protection**
   - Never expose backend API keys to frontend
   - Securely store user-provided keys
   - Validate origins for all API requests

2. **Input Validation**
   - Sanitize all user inputs
   - Limit request sizes
   - Prevent injection attacks

3. **Data Privacy**
   - Clearly communicate data handling practices
   - Allow users to opt out of persistence
   - Provide options for local-only operation

## Testing Requirements

1. **Layout Testing**
   - Verify input stays at bottom across all scenarios
   - Test with many messages to ensure scrolling works
   - Validate resize functionality within constraints

2. **Functionality Testing**
   - Verify Enter/Shift+Enter behavior
   - Test settings integration and persistence
   - Validate API interactions and error handling

3. **Integration Testing**
   - Ensure compatibility with main application
   - Test configuration system integration
   - Verify theme consistency and responsiveness

## Documentation

Include comprehensive documentation covering:

1. **User Guide**
   - How to access and use the AI Assistant
   - Available prompt patterns and examples
   - Configuration options explained

2. **Technical Documentation**
   - Architecture and component descriptions
   - API endpoints and request formats
   - Configuration schema and options

3. **Developer Guide**
   - How to extend or modify the AI Assistant
   - Integration points with the main application
   - Security and performance considerations

## Starting and Stopping the server for test

you can restart the server with all the changes re-built with the following command:
sudo ./setup-kroki-server.sh restart

the site will be available in https://localhost:8443/

The Makefile or docker compose files might have to be updated if new files are genrated to make sure they are included in the update

Commit message:

feat: enhance configuration for ports in .env file and update related documentation

demoSite/ai-assistant-spec.md, after:

# AI Assistant Feature Specification for Kroki Diagram Editor

## Overview

The AI Assistant provides intelligent diagram generation and editing capabilities integrated directly into the Kroki diagram editor web application. It allows users to create, modify, and troubleshoot diagrams using natural language prompts.

## Core Requirements

### Prompt Processing

Send composed prompts to the configured AI backend API with appropriate context:

1. **Prompt Template**
   - Use a template string (called `promptTemplate`) that includes placeholders for `diagramType`, `currentCode`, and `userPrompt`.
   - The user prompt must be modifiable by the user in the settings if they are using a custom API. othersise, the prompt theme is fixed in the backend. The backend proxy prompt must be configurable in the .env file so that it can be updated without modifyuing code in teh docker based build system.
   - The system prompt must ensure that the AI response is always in the form of a valid JSON object: `{"diagramCode": "...", "explanation": "..."}`. The `diagramCode` field must contain only the raw diagram code. The `explanation` field should contain a brief, user-friendly summary of the changes made by the AI.

2. **Context Inclusion**
   - Include the current diagram type (e.g., PlantUML, Mermaid, Graphviz)
   - Include the current diagram code if it exists
   - Support diagram validation and error correction

### User Interface

1. **Chat Interface**
   - Floating, draggable chat window
   - Resizable input area with drag handle (60px-300px height range)
   - Sticky input positioning at bottom of chat window
   - Proper scrolling for message history
   - Clear visual distinction between user and AI messages

2. **Input Handling**
   - Enter key sends messages
   - Shift+Enter creates new lines
   - Auto-resize input area based on content
   - Send button for mouse/touch users
   - Escape key minimizes chat when focused

3. **Visual Integration**
   - Match application theme (light/dark mode)
   - Consistent styling with main application
   - Professional animations and transitions
   - Mobile-friendly responsive design
4. chat history must be cleared when the user closes the chat window. The chat history must not be persisted across sessions.
5. chat history must be limited to 100 messages, with the oldest messages being removed when the limit is reached.
6. chat history must be displayed in a scrollable area, with the most recent messages at the bottom.
7. chat messages must be displayed in a chat bubble format, with user messages on the right and AI messages on the left.
8. the chat window must show an indicator for the AI response when it is being generated, or error retrys are in progress and the indicator must be removed when the response is received.
9. An indication of whether the system default AI backendo is being used or a user provided API endpoint is being used must be shown in the chat window. This should be a small label at the top of the chat window that indicates "Using Default AI Backend" or "Using User Provided API Endpoint" based on the user's configuration.
10. If the user is using a custom API endpoint, and there are communication errors or unfixable errors with the backend, the chat window must display a clear error message indicating that the AI Assistant is unable to communicate with the backend and include a suggestion to check the API endpoint and key configuration in the settings. The error message must also show a link to the settings modal where the user can update their API endpoint and key configuration. This is not an additional settings requirement, but rather an error handling requirement for the chat window. So just show the same global settings modal that is already implemented in the application.


### additional Ai assistant Settings Panel Requirements

Add a new "AI Assistant" tab in the settings UI with the following configurable options:

1. **API Configuration**
   - checkbox to enable/disable custom API key and endpoint configuration by the user. IF a user does not enable this, the app will use the default backend proxy API. using the backend proxy API is the default behavior.
   - AI Enabled Toggle (default: true)
   - AI Endpoint URL Input (default: https://api.openai.com/v1/chat/completions). enabled only if the user has enabled custom API configuration.
   - API Key Input (default: empty, enabled only if the user has enabled custom API configuration)
   - Model Selector (Default: gpt-4o). enabled only if the user has enabled custom API configuration.
     - Dropdown for selecting AI model
     - Default to "gpt-4o" if available, otherwise fallback to "gpt-4" or "gpt-3.5 Turbo"
     - Allow custom text input for unsupported models
    - Options should include:
        - GPT-4o
        - GPT-4
        - GPT-3.5 Turbo
        - Claude 3
        - Custom (text input)

2. **Behavior Settings**
   - Maximum Retry Attempts (default: 3, applies to all users)
   - Custom user Prompt Template Editor (appears when "Custom" is selected)
   - Auto-validate Generated Code (toggle)

3. **Privacy Options**
   
   - Timeout Setting (seconds, default: 30)

These settings apply to both direct and proxied (backend) API usage.

## Backend Support

### Default API Usage (No User Configuration)

If the user does not configure their own endpoint or API key, the app must send requests to a proxy backend API.

This proxy will:

- Use its own API keys (not exposed to the frontend)
- Handle rate limiting and error management
- Provide enhanced security and logging
- sends responses back to the frontend 
- uses system and user prompt templates from the .env file, which can be updated without modifying the code in the docker-based build system.
- uses API endpoint, model and key from the .env file, which can be updated without modifying the code in the docker-based build system.
- Validate diagram code using Kroki before sending to AI
- Recieves the current diagram type, code and user request as input, and returns a response with the generated code and any error messages.
- provide appropriate error messages for API failures, authentication errors, and other issues.
- support fetching the system prompt and user prompt templates so that it can be used in the frontend when the user is configuring their own API endpoint and key.
    - In this case, the frontend must not allow the user to modify the system prompt template, but it must allow the user to modify the user prompt template.

### Proxy Server Requirements
- Implemented in Python using Flask
- Handle CORS for frontend requests
- allowed domains are configured in the .env file
- Validate request origins to prevent unauthorized access


### Custom API Support

When users configure their own API endpoint and key:
- Send requests directly to the specified endpoint 
    - Fetch the system and user prompt templates from teh proxy server but do not use the proxy server to send requests to the AI provider.
    - In this case, the frontend must not allow the user to modify the system prompt template, but it must allow the user to modify the user prompt template.
- Store credentials securely (not in plain localStorage)
- do not show the API key in plain text unless the user explicitly requests it.
- Handle API responses and errors gracefully
- Validate inputs before sending requests
- Provide appropriate error messages for API failures

## Handling AI responses
- The system and user prompts must be setup in such a way that the AI response is always in the form of a valid JSON object: `{"diagramCode": "...", "explanation": "..."}`.
  - The `diagramCode` field must contain only the raw diagram code, without any additional text or markdown code fences.
  - The `explanation` field should contain a brief, user-friendly summary of the changes made by the AI. This explanation will be displayed in the chat window.
  - The current diagram type and code must be included in the prompt to ensure the AI understands the context. Use prompt templates to ensure the AI requests are formatted correctly and the context is included.
  - If the user asks for something that the AI cannot do, the AI must respond with an appropriate error message in the `explanation` field, and the `diagramCode` field should be empty or contain a message indicating that no code was generated.
- When the AI response (expected as a JSON object) is received, either from the proxy server or directly from the AI provider, the response must first be checked for errors and valid JSON structure.
- The `diagramCode` from the JSON response must be validated to ensure it is valid diagram code. Do this by sending the `diagramCode` to the Kroki API for validation. if a non-200 response is received, the `diagramCode` must be considered invalid.
- The `explanation` from the JSON response should be displayed as an AI message in the chat window.
- in case of an invalid `diagramCode`, the AI Assistant must retry the request by including the original code, the invalid `diagramCode` provided by the AI, the user prompt, and the Kroki validation error message in the prompt. This will help the AI understand what went wrong and how to fix it. The retry request must also ask for the same JSON structured response.
    - this means there must be an additional prompt template for retrying the request, which includes the original code, new code provided by the AI, and the user prompt and kroki validation error message.
- Use the retry count to limit the number of retries for invalid responses.
- The retry indication must be shown in the chat window, so that the user can see how many times the AI has tried to generate a valid response.


## Technical Implementation

### Frontend Components

1. **AI Assistant Class**
   - Implement as a self-contained ES6 class
   - Support configuration via config manager or fallback
   - Handle element selection using proper context
   - Provide comprehensive error handling

2. **Chat Window Layout**
   - Use flexbox with proper constraints
   - Implement sticky positioning for input container
   - Ensure scrollable message area with fixed input
   - Support resizable input area via drag handle

3. **Keyboard Navigation**
   - Enter key sends messages (no shift key)
   - Shift+Enter creates new lines
   - Escape key minimizes chat when focused
   - Tab navigation for accessibility

### Backend Components

1. **Proxy Server**
   - Implement in Python using Flask
   - Provide proper CORS handling
   - Validate request origins for security
   - Implement rate limiting and error handling
   - Support environment variable configuration

2. **API Integration**
   - Multiple AI providedr support will be facilitatted with litelllm proxy . 
   - Properly format prompts with context
   - Validate diagram code with Kroki

## Configuration & Environment

### Environment Variables

The backend should support configuration via environment variables:

```
AI_ENABLED=true
AI_ENDPOINT=https://api.openai.com/v1/chat/completions
AI_API_KEY=your_api_key_here
AI_MODEL=gpt-4o
AI_TIMEOUT=30
```

### Frontend Configuration

The frontend should store user preferences in the application's configuration system:

```javascript
{
  ai: {
    enabled: true,
    endpoint: "API_ENDPOINT_URL",
    apiKey: "USER_API_KEY", 
    model: "gpt-4o",
    maxRetryAttempts: 3,
    promptTheme: "default",
    autoValidate: true,
    useProxy: true,
    persistHistory: false,
    timeout: 30
  }
}
```

## User Experience Guidelines

1. **First-time Experience**
   - Provide a clear welcome message
   - Explain chat history limitations
   - Suggest example prompts for getting started

2. **Error Handling**
   - Show clear error messages for API failures
   - Provide suggestions for fixing configuration issues
   - Degrade gracefully when backend is unavailable

3. **Performance**
   - Show loading indicators during API requests
   - Maintain responsive UI during heavy operations
   - Implement request timeouts and cancellation

## Security Considerations

1. **API Key Protection**
   - Never expose backend API keys to frontend
   - Securely store user-provided keys
   - Validate origins for all API requests

2. **Input Validation**
   - Sanitize all user inputs
   - Limit request sizes
   - Prevent injection attacks

3. **Data Privacy**
   - Clearly communicate data handling practices
   - Allow users to opt out of persistence
   - Provide options for local-only operation

## Testing Requirements

1. **Layout Testing**
   - Verify input stays at bottom across all scenarios
   - Test with many messages to ensure scrolling works
   - Validate resize functionality within constraints

2. **Functionality Testing**
   - Verify Enter/Shift+Enter behavior
   - Test settings integration and persistence
   - Validate API interactions and error handling

3. **Integration Testing**
   - Ensure compatibility with main application
   - Test configuration system integration
   - Verify theme consistency and responsiveness

## Documentation

Include comprehensive documentation covering:

1. **User Guide**
   - How to access and use the AI Assistant
   - Available prompt patterns and examples
   - Configuration options explained

2. **Technical Documentation**
   - Architecture and component descriptions
   - API endpoints and request formats
   - Configuration schema and options

3. **Developer Guide**
   - How to extend or modify the AI Assistant
   - Integration points with the main application
   - Security and performance considerations

## Starting and Stopping the server for test

you can restart the server with all the changes re-built with the following command:
sudo ./setup-kroki-server.sh restart

the site will be available in https://localhost:8443/ (default port, configurable in .env file)

The Makefile or docker compose files might have to be updated if new files are genrated to make sure they are included in the update
